Prevent broker scale down (#54)
strimzi/proposals: prevent-broker-scale-down-if-contains-partition-replicas.md

If any partition replicas are still assigned to the broker which is going to be removed from the cluster, then we should get some warning in the status of the Kafka resource which will prompt users to do the reassignment and prevent the broker from being removed until the partition replicas are reassigned.

## Proposal

This proposal suggest how we can add the check to detect if the broker still contains any partition replicas and what to do if the broker scale down is not possible.

### Checking if the broker contains partition

#### Flow:

- The topic metadata will be queried to detect if the broker contains any partition replicas.
- An Admin client instance will be used to get connect with the cluster and get us the topic details(topic name and topic description)
- Then we can use this information to check if the broker contains any partition replicas or not.
- The scale down is done after we make sure that the brokers that are going to be removed aren't containing any partition replicas. By doing this we avoid any partial scale down.

#### What to do if a broker contains partitions?

#### Flow:

> - A check will be placed before the reconciliation for brokers take place.

Reviewer: What exactly does this mean?

Author: By check , I meant we will be introducing the logic i.e. a condition to check whether the Broker contains any partition replicas or not before the scale down happens

Reviewer: I think the check is fairly clear ... but the palcement not so much.

Reviewer: I think it should definitely be in the KafkaReconciler. But I don't know where exactly. That is why I think this needs to be part of the proposal because it is not trivial and not completely clear.

Author: Sorry for not resolving this earlier but this is now updated

  This check will make sure that the brokers that are going to be removed doesn't contain any partition replicas on them.   

> - During the check, if the admin client is not able to connect to the cluster (not able to get the topic details) or if the partition replicas are assigned to the brokers that are going to be removed, we will update the status of the Kafka CR with the respective warning and fail the Kafka reconciliation.

Reviewer: This is greatm but what do you do with the ongoing reconciliation?

- Later on we can let the user check the status and decide to either change the `spec.replicas` back to the previous count or reassign the partition replicas to other brokers, we can move the process accordingly.
  
## Affected/not affected projects

> This change will affect the `KafkaAssembly operator` class, and will be place a check before we run the reconciliations for the brokers. 

Reviewer: The name is `KafkaAssemblyOperator` class. But the logic probably now fits into `KafkaReconciler` instead?

```suggestion
This change will affect the `KafkaAssemblyOperator` class, and will be place a check before we run the reconciliations for the brokers. 
```

If any partition replicas are still assigned to the broker which is going to be removed from the cluster, then we should get some warning in the status of the Kafka resource which will prompt users to do the reassignment and prevent the broker from being removed until the partition replicas are reassigned.

## Proposal

This proposal suggest how we can add the check to detect if the broker still contains any partition replicas and what to do if the broker scale down is not possible.

## Implementation

### Class

A new utility class named `PreventBrokerScaleDownUtils` will be added to the assembly package of cluster operator module

The reason for having this class is to keep all the utilities for checking the broker partition replicas separate such that we don't create a mess in the `KafkaReconciler` class by adding multiple large methods.
Also, it will help us to test the changes easily.

This class will have utility methods like `canScaleDownBrokers`, `canScaleDownBrokerCheck` and `brokerHasAnyReplicas` methods to check the if broker contains any partition replicas or not.

> This class will also contain methods like `topicNames`, `describeTopics` to query the topic metadata.

Reviewer 2: As a rule of thumb, it's typically not necessary in a Proposal to go into great detail about the implementation (which will have its own PR). It's not universally true (e.g. adding or removing dependencies), but in this case I think you could drop this section, personally.

#### Process:

- When the broker count is changed in the Kafka resource, the `reconcile` method of the `KafkaReconciler` will be triggered to reconcile the Kafka brokers.
- The `canScaleDownBrokers()` utility method will be present at the top of the compose chain in the `reconcile()` method of the `KafkaReconciler`.
- This method will check if the broker contains any partition replicas or not and will continue the process based on the outcome.
- For doing so, the topic metadata will be queried to detect if the broker contains any partition replicas.
- An Admin client instance will be used to connect with the cluster and get us the topic details(topic name and topic description)
- Then we can use this information to check if the broker contains any partition replicas or not.
- The scale down is done after we make sure that the brokers that are going to be removed doesn't contain any partition replicas. By doing this we avoid any partial scale down.

#### What to do if a broker contains partitions?

#### Flow:

> - If partition replicas are found out on the broker we will revert back the kafka replicas to the previous count by changing the replica count directly in the kafka object and update the status with a warning stating that the scale down is not done and the replica count is changed back to previous one in the memory.

Reviewer 2: 1. What exactly are we changing it back _to_? The current value of the `spec.replicas` in the STS/SPS?
2. Be explicit whether or not the rest of the reconciliation carries on as normal (I think it does, right?)
3. Be explicit about the revised schema for the `status`. Is this situation modelled as a new condition in the `status.conditions`, or some other way?  In particular how does the user know what the current number of brokers in their cluster is? For example if you're saying the `Ready` condition will be present (because the rest of the reconciliation completed OK), and some other new condition (e.g. `CannotScaleDown`) is also present (to indicate that the scale down specifically can't be done right now), then the `spec.kafka.replicas` != the actual number of replicas, and the user can't know from the `Kafka` resource what the actual number of 
brokers in their cluster is.

Author: 1. Yes. I am changing the `spec.replicas` in STS/SPS
2. Yes, it will run normally
3. I was planning to print the `spec.replicas` in the condition's message

## Current situation

Currently, when removing brokers from the Kafka cluster, there is no check to see if these brokers contain any partition replicas.
The [documentation](https://strimzi.io/docs/operators/latest/configuring.html#scaling-clusters-str) recommends that all topic-partition replicas are reassigned before doing this scaling action, which means that if someone tries to scale down without re-assigning the brokers, it can cause availability issues or data loss.

## Motivation

We should introduce the logic which can detect if the broker which is going to be removed still contains the partition replicas or not.
If any partition replicas are still assigned to the broker which is going to be removed from the cluster, then we should get some warning in the status of the Kafka resource which will prompt users to do the reassignment and prevent the broker from being removed until the partition replicas are reassigned.

## Proposal

This proposal suggest how we can add the check to detect if the broker still contains any partition replicas and what to do if the broker scale down is not possible.

## Implementation

### Process:

> - When the broker count is changed in the Kafka resource, the `reconcile` method of the `KafkaReconciler` will be triggered to reconcile the Kafka brokers.

Reviewer: You should describe how do you actually detect if scale-down is happening or not as presumably you will run this only in scale-down situation?

- The `canScaleDownBrokers()` utility method will be present at the top of the compose chain in the `reconcile()` method of the `KafkaReconciler`.
- This method will check if the broker contains any partition replicas or not and will continue the process based on the outcome.
- For doing so, the topic metadata will be queried to detect if the broker contains any partition replicas.
- An Admin client instance will be used to connect with the cluster and get us the topic details(topic name and topic description)
- Then we can use this information to check if the broker contains any partition replicas or not.
- The scale down is done after we make sure that the brokers that are going to be removed doesn't contain any partition replicas. By doing this we avoid any partial scale down.

### What to do if a broker contains partitions?

#### Flow:

> - If partition replicas are found out on the broker we will revert back the kafka replicas to the previous count by changing the `spec.replicas` in the STS/SPS and the rest of the reconciliation will be done normally.

Reviewer: There is no `.spec.replicas` in StrimziPodSets. This seems to also ignore all the other parts - e.g. generated broker certificates, generated services, ingresses, routes etc.

- We will also generate a new condition which will be added to Kafka resource status depicting that the scale down is not done. It will also contain the `spec.replicas` count(which is being currently being used) in the condition message.
```yaml
Status:
  Cluster Id:  WQvEjYUMS1aiIKtMTvkMIw
  Conditions:
    Last Transition Time:  2023-01-13T13:30:18.880555172Z

>     Message:               Can't Scale down since broker contains partition replicas. Ignoring `replicas` setting in Kafka custom resource: my-cluster-kafka. Current `spec.replicas` value is 3

Reviewer: I'm not sure if these are just typos in the message or misunderstanding how it works. But normally, the custom resource would be `my-cluster`. `my-cluster-kafka` would be the workload resource (e.g. StatefulSet). Also, in the custom resource, the path would be in `.spec.kafka.replicas` and not `.spec.replicas`.

    Reason:                ScaleDownException
    Status:                True
    Type:                  Warning
    Last Transition Time:  2023-01-13T13:30:20.844245196Z
    Status:                True
    Type:                  Ready
```

> - During the check, if the admin client is not able to connect to the cluster (not able to get the topic details) or if the partition replicas are assigned to the brokers that are going to be removed, we will update the status of the Kafka CR with the respective warning and revert back the replica count.

Reviewer: If would be good to describe how do you plan to deal with less usual situations:
* Initial deployment
* Scale-down, but no pods running etc.

Changing the kafka replica count directly in the Kafka Cluster would help us ensure that we keep same replicas everywhere like while generating certificates, services, ingresses, routes etc.
- The broker certificates, services, ingresses, routes etc. will be generated based on the reverted kafka count and the rest of the reconciliation will be done normally.
- We will also generate a new condition which will be added to Kafka resource status depicting that the scale down is not done. It will also contain the `spec.replicas` count(which is being currently being used) in the condition message.
```yaml
Status:
  Cluster Id:  WQvEjYUMS1aiIKtMTvkMIw
  Conditions:
    Last Transition Time:  2023-01-13T13:30:18.880555172Z
    Message:               Can't Scale down since broker contains partition replicas. Ignoring `spec.kafka.replicas` setting in Kafka custom resource: my-cluster. Current kafka replicas count is 3
    Reason:                ScaleDownException
    Status:                True
    Type:                  Warning
    Last Transition Time:  2023-01-13T13:30:20.844245196Z
    Status:                True

>     Type:                  Ready

Author: Yeah, I used `kubectl describe`. I will fix this

- For doing so, the topic metadata will be queried to detect if the broker contains any partition replicas.
- An Admin client instance will be used to connect with the cluster and get us the topic details(topic name and topic description)
- Then we can use this information to check if the broker contains any partition replicas or not.
- The scale down is done after we make sure that the brokers that are going to be removed doesn't contain any partition replicas.
By doing this we avoid any partial scale down.

### What to do if a broker contains partitions?

#### Flow:

- If partition replicas are found out on the broker we will revert back the Kafka replicas to the previous count by setting replicas directly in the `KafkaCluster` class using `setReplicas()` method. 
  Changing the Kafka replica count directly in the Kafka Cluster would help us ensure that we keep same replicas everywhere like while generating certificates, services, ingresses, routes etc.
- The broker certificates, services, ingresses, routes etc. will be treated with the original number of nodes and the rest of the reconciliation will be done normally.

> - There is a small risk at this point since the KafkaCluster instance will already exist and the storage validation will be already done. This can cause forbidden storage changes which can lead to some problems since the validation was done with the new count of Kafka replicas but at the same time the likelihood of both illegal storage changes and scale-down happening at the same time is low. 

Reviewer 3: This sounds scary. Can we elaborate more? I think a concrete example would help here.

Author: @fvaleri @scholzj Does this sound less scary and better -->   Note : - By the time the replicas are reverted back, the storage validation will be already complete based on the replica count present in Kafka custom resource. This can can cause some issues if someone tries to make some forbidden changes (changes that might not be supported) to the storage during this time frame. To fix this problem, the user should revert back the `spec.kafka.replicas` in the Kafka custom resource back to the replica count currently being used by the `KafkaCluster` class and the next reconciliation will pick up those changes.

Author: Fixed now as per suggestion by @scholzj

Reviewer 3: > Note: By the time the replicas are reverted back, the storage validation will be already complete based on the replica count present in Kafka custom resource. This can can cause some issues if someone tries to make some forbidden changes (changes that might not be supported) to the storage during this time frame. To fix this problem, the user should revert back the `spec.kafka.replicas` in the Kafka custom resource back to the replica count currently being used by the `KafkaCluster` class and the next reconciliation will pick up those changes. 

That's better, but you have "back" two times. The final phrase can simply be: 

To fix this problem, the user should revert back the `spec.kafka.replicas` in the Kafka custom resource and the next reconciliation will pick up those changes.

- We also generate a new condition which will be added to Kafka resource status depicting that the scale down is not done. It will also contain the `spec.replicas` count(which is being currently being used) in the condition message.
  ```yaml
  status:
    clusterId: DoRj5f84Sruq_7TJ31y7Zw
    conditions:
      - lastTransitionTime: "2023-02-22T10:18:56.578009768Z"

>         message: 'Can''t Scale down since broker contains partition replicas. Ignoring

Reviewer 3: Here I prefer the error message style that we use for `ReplicationFactorChangeException`, where we suggest to revert back and we use the exact configuration path (i.e. `spec.kafka.replicas`).

Author: Does this look good --> `'Cannot Scale down since broker contains partition replicas. The `spec.kafka.replicas` should be reverted to 4 directly in the Kafka resource'.`

Reviewer 3: Yep, much better. Thanks.

        `replicas` setting in Kafka custom resource: my-cluster. Current Kafka replicas
        count is 4'
        reason: ScaleDownException
        status: "True"
        type: Warning
      - lastTransitionTime: "2023-02-22T10:18:57.664668863Z"
        status: "True"
        type: Ready
  ```

### How to bypass the broker scale down mechanism

> - To bypass the broker scale down mechanism you can use the annotation `strimzi.io/bypass-brokerScaleDownCheck: "true"` on the Kafka custom resource. For e.g.

Reviewer 3: It's good to have a bypass option, but I found the annotation name a bit weird. For consistency with the other annotations we provide, I would suggest `strimzi.io/bypass-broker-scaledown-check: "true"`.

The [documentation](https://strimzi.io/docs/operators/latest/configuring.html#scaling-clusters-str) recommends that all topic-partition replicas are reassigned before doing this scaling action, which means that if someone tries to scale down without re-assigning the brokers, it can cause availability issues or data loss.

## Motivation

We should introduce the logic which can detect if the broker which is going to be removed still contains the partition replicas or not.
If any partition replicas are still assigned to the broker which is going to be removed from the cluster, then we should get some warning in the status of the Kafka resource which will prompt users to do the reassignment and prevent the broker from being removed until the partition replicas are reassigned.

## Proposal

This proposal suggest how we can add the check to detect if the broker still contains any partition replicas and what to do if the broker scale down is not possible.

## Implementation

### Process:

- When the broker count is changed in the Kafka resource, the `reconcile` method of the `KafkaReconciler` will be triggered to reconcile the Kafka brokers.

> - The `canScaleDownBrokers()` utility method will be present at the top of the compose chain in the `reconcile()` method of the `KafkaReconciler` to make sure that every other method  which requires the replica count use the correct replica count based on the outcome of the check.

Reviewer: Double space.

```suggestion
- The `canScaleDownBrokers()` utility method will be present at the top of the compose chain in the `reconcile()` method of the `KafkaReconciler` to make sure that every other method which requires the replica count use the correct replica count based on the outcome of the check.
```

- The `canScaleDownBrokers()` method will only run if we see the current Kafka replicas (replicas before the Kafka custom resource is modified) count gets greater than the Kafka replicas present in the Kafka custom resource.
  We can get the desired Kafka replica count by using `kafka.getReplicas()` where `kafka` is an object of `KafkaCluster` class .
- This method will check if the broker contains any partition replicas or not and will continue the process based on the outcome.

> - For doing so, the topic metadata will be queried to detect if the broker contains any partition replicas.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- To do so, the topic metadata will be queried to detect if the broker contains any partition replicas.
```

- An Admin client instance will be used to connect with the cluster and get us the topic details(topic name and topic description)

> - Then we can use this information to check if the broker contains any partition replicas or not.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- We can then use this information to check if the broker contains any partition replicas or not.
```

> - The scale down is done after we make sure that the brokers that are going to be removed doesn't contain any partition replicas.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- The scale-down is made after we make sure that the brokers that are going to be removed don't contain any partition replicas.
```

>   By doing this we avoid any partial scale down.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
  By doing this we avoid any partial scale-down.
```

### What to do if a broker contains partitions?

#### Flow:

> - If partition replicas are found out on the broker we will revert back the Kafka replicas to the previous count by setting replicas directly in the `KafkaCluster` class using `setReplicas()` method. 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- If partition replicas are found on the broker, we will revert back the Kafka replicas to the previous count by setting replicas directly in the `KafkaCluster` class using `setReplicas()` method. 
```

>   Changing the Kafka replica count directly in the Kafka Cluster would help us ensure that we keep same replicas everywhere like while generating certificates, services, ingresses, routes etc.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
  Changing the Kafka replica count directly in the Kafka Cluster helps to ensure that we keep the same replicas everywhere, such as when generating certificates, services, ingresses, routes etc.
```

- The broker certificates, services, ingresses, routes etc. will be treated with the original number of nodes and the rest of the reconciliation will be done normally.

> - We also generate a new condition which will be added to Kafka resource status depicting that the scale down is not done. It will also contain the `spec.replicas` count(which is being currently being used) in the condition message.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- We also generate a new condition which will be added to Kafka resource status depicting that the scale down is not done. It will also contain the `spec.replicas` count (that is being currently being used) in the condition message.
```

  ```yaml
  status:
    clusterId: DoRj5f84Sruq_7TJ31y7Zw
    conditions:
      - lastTransitionTime: "2023-02-22T10:18:56.578009768Z"
        message: 'Cannot Scale down since broker contains partition replicas. The `spec.kafka.replicas` should be reverted back to 4 directly in the Kafka resource'.
        reason: ScaleDownException
        status: "True"
        type: Warning
      - lastTransitionTime: "2023-02-22T10:18:57.664668863Z"
        status: "True"
        type: Ready
  ```

>   Note :  By the time the replicas are reverted back, the storage validation will be already complete based on the replica count present in Kafka custom resource.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  Note: By the time the replicas are reverted back, the storage validation will be already complete based on the replica count present in Kafka custom resource.
```

>   This can can cause some issues if someone tries to make some forbidden changes (changes that might not be supported) to the storage during this time frame.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
  This can cause some issues if someone tries to make some forbidden changes (changes that might not be supported) to the storage during this time frame.
```

  This is hard to prevent in the current code.
  But the likelihood of this happening at the same time should be relatively small.
  So this proposal suggests to ignore this risk.

### How to bypass the broker scale down mechanism

> - To bypass the broker scale down mechanism you can use the annotation `strimzi.io/bypass-broker-scaledown-check: "true"` on the Kafka custom resource. For e.g.
>   ```sh
>   kubectl annotate Kafka my-cluster strimzi.io/bypass-broker-scaledown-check: "true"

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- To bypass the broker scale down mechanism you can use the annotation `strimzi.io/bypass-broker-scaledown-check: "true"` on the Kafka custom resource:
  ```sh
  kubectl annotate Kafka my-cluster strimzi.io/bypass-broker-scaledown-check: "true"
```

  ```

### Other Scenarios

> - During the check, if the admin client is not able to connect to the cluster (not able to get the topic details), we will update the status of the Kafka CR with the respective warning and revert back the replica count in the `KafkaCluster` class.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- During the check, if the Admin client is not able to connect to the cluster (not able to get the topic details), we will update the status of the Kafka CR with the respective warning and revert back the replica count in the `KafkaCluster` class.
```

- If the Kafka cluster is just initialized and the pods are not ready, the `canScaleDownBrokers()` utility method will not work because the current Kafka replicas (replicas before the Kafka custom resource is modified) count will be equal to 0 and the Kafka replicas present in the Kafka custom resource will also be 0. Hence, the mechanism will not run since the condition requires the current replica count to be greater than the Kafka replicas present in the Kafka custom resource

> - If the current Kafka replicas/pods are 0 the mechanism will not work since if there are zero brokers it will not be considered a scaledown.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- If the current Kafka replicas/pods are 0, the mechanism will not work since if there are zero brokers it will not be considered a scale-down.
```

 
## Affected/not affected projects

> This change will affect the Strimzi Cluster Operator Module and mostly the `KafkaReconciler` class.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
This change will affect the Strimzi Cluster Operator module and mostly the `KafkaReconciler` class.
```

- Then we can use this information to check if the broker contains any partition replicas or not.
- The scale down is done after we make sure that the brokers that are going to be removed doesn't contain any partition replicas. By doing this we avoid any partial scale down.

### What to do if a broker contains partitions?

#### Flow:

- If partition replicas are found out on the broker we will revert back the kafka replicas to the previous count by changing the `spec.replicas` in the STS/SPS and the rest of the reconciliation will be done normally.

> - We will also generate a new condition which will be added to Kafka resource status depicting that the scale down is not done. It will also contain the `spec.replicas` count(which is being currently being used) in the condition message.

Reviewer 2: Can you give an example YAML?

Would the fact that this resource wasn't completely reconciled be apparent from any metrics? Off the top of my head this would be the first time a resource with a `Ready` condition wasn't completely reconciled. I'm not sure how well that aligns with user expectations, TBH. We might need to add a metric so that users can alert on resources like this.

Author: @tombentley Hi, do you want the yaml with the warning condition?

Author: This is the Kafka resource yaml when the scaled down fails --> https://gist.github.com/ShubhamRwt/1d26531f5866529eba85820b93825110. I have added the `status` section to the proposal also. Iam not sure on if we need metrics or not for this since we are not failing the reconciliation. @ppatierno @scholzj wdyt?

Reviewer: Well, until we have some auto-scaling solution, they will probably notice it:
* They will take a manual action and expect to see the result
* It will not be just the status warning they will see, they will also see the pods which did not scale down

So I think this will be more of a problem if we ever have some form of auto-scaling.

Reviewer 6: Good point from Jakub. User has ways to see that what they asked for didn't happen. Anyway, I am not against having a metric. It's just not sure how much it's useful today.
